dataprep.rst, before:

.. _dataprep:

===================
Prepping a Datacube
===================

In this example we will download a datacube to decompose into individual
spectra. The example cube we will use is from the GALFA-HI emission survey at
the Arecibo Observatory, specifically the `M33 datacube
<https://sites.google.com/site/galfahi/data>`_ from `Putman et al. 2009
<http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009ApJ...703.1486P>`_. You can directly download
the cube from here:

http://www.astro.columbia.edu/~mputman/M33only.fits.gz


Storing Data cube in GaussPy-Friendly Format
----------------------------

Before decomposing the datacube, we must store the data in a format readable by
GaussPy. The following code provides an example of how to read a fits-formatted
datacube and store the spectral information. The necessary parameters to specify
here are:

1. ``FILENAME_DATA``: the fits filename of the target data cube

2. ``FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY``: the filename to store the GaussPy-friendly data in

3. ``RMS``: estimate of the RMS uncertainty per channel for constructing the
   error arrays

.. code-block:: python

    # Read fits datacube and save in GaussPy format
    import numpy as np
    import pickle
    from astropy.io import fits

    # Specify necessary parameters
    FILENAME_DATA = 'M33only.fits'
    FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY = 'cube.pickle'
    RMS = 0.06

    hdu_list = fits.open(FILENAME_DATA)
    hdu = hdu_list[0]
    cube = hdu.data

    # initialize
    data = {}
    errors = np.ones(cube.shape[0]) * RMS
    chan = np.arange(cube.shape[0])

    # cycle through each spectrum
    for i in xrange(cube.shape[1]):
        for j in xrange(cube.shape[2]):

            # get the spectrum
            spectrum = cube[:, i, j]

            # get the spectrum location
            location = np.array((i, j))

            # Enter results into GaussPy-friendly dataset
            data['data_list'] = data.get('data_list', []) + [spectrum]
            data['x_values'] = data.get('x_values', []) + [chan]
            data['errors'] = data.get('errors', []) + [errors]
            data['location'] = data.get('location', []) + [location]

    # Save decomposition information
    pickle.dump(data, open(FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY, 'w'))

The output pickle file from the above example code contains a python dictionary
with four keys, including the independent and dependent arrays (i.e. channels
and spectral values), an array per spectrum describing the uncertainty per
channel, and the (x,y) pixel location within the datacube for reference.

Creating a Synthetic Training Dataset
-------------------------------------

Before decomposing the target dataset, we need to train the AGD algorithm to
select the best values of :math:`\alpha` in two-phase decomposition. First, we
construct a synthetic training dataset composed of Gaussian components with
parameters sampled randomly from ranges that represent the data as closely as
possible.

1. ``RMS``: root mean square uncertainty per channel

2. ``NCHANNELS``: number of channels per spectrum

3. ``NSPECTRA``: number of spectra to include in the training dataset

4. ``NCOMPS_lims``: range in total number of components to include in each
   spectrum

5. ``AMP_lims, FWHM_lims, MEAN_lims``: range of possible Gaussian component
   values, amplitudes, FWHM and means, from which to build the spectra

6. ``TRAINING_SET`` : True or False, determines whether the decomposition
   "answers" are stored along with the data for accuracy verification in
   training

7. ``FILENAME_TRAIN`` : filename for storing the training data

.. code-block:: python

    # Create training dataset with Gaussian profile
    import numpy as np
    import pickle

    def gaussian(amp, fwhm, mean):
        return lambda x: amp * np.exp(-4. * np.log(2) * (x-mean)**2 / fwhm**2)

    # Estimate of the root-mean-square uncertainty per channel (RMS)
    RMS = 0.06

    # Specify the number of spectral channels (NCHANNELS)
    NCHANNELS = 680

    # Specify the number of spectra (NSPECTRA)
    NSPECTRA = 200

    # Estimate the number of components
    NCOMPS_lims = [3,6]

    # Specify the min-max range of possible properties of the Gaussian function paramters:
    AMP_lims = [0.5,30]
    FWHM_lims = [20,150] # channels
    MEAN_lims = [400,600] # channels

    # Indicate whether the data created here will be used as a training set
    # (a.k.a. decide to store the "true" answers or not at the end)
    TRAINING_SET = True

    # Specify the pickle file to store the results in
    FILENAME_TRAIN = 'cube_training_data.pickle'

    # Initialize
    data = {}
    chan = np.arange(NCHANNELS)
    errors = np.ones(NCHANNELS) * RMS

    # Begin populating data
    for i in range(NSPECTRA):
        spectrum_i = np.random.randn(NCHANNELS) * RMS

        amps = []
        fwhms = []
        means = []

        ncomps = np.random.choice((np.arange(NCOMPS_lims[0],NCOMPS_lims[1]+1)))

        for comp in xrange(ncomps):
            # Select random values for components within specified ranges
            a = np.random.uniform(AMP_lims[0], AMP_lims[1])
            w = np.random.uniform(FWHM_lims[0], FWHM_lims[1])
            m = np.random.uniform(MEAN_lims[0], MEAN_lims[1])

            # Add Gaussian profile with the above random parameters to the spectrum
            spectrum_i += gaussian(a, w, m)(chan)

            # Append the parameters to initialized lists for storing
            amps.append(a)
            fwhms.append(w)
            means.append(m)

        # Enter results into AGD dataset
        data['data_list'] = data.get('data_list', []) + [spectrum_i]
        data['x_values'] = data.get('x_values', []) + [chan]
        data['errors'] = data.get('errors', []) + [errors]

        # If training data, keep answers
        if TRAINING_SET:
            data['amplitudes'] = data.get('amplitudes', []) + [amps]
            data['fwhms'] = data.get('fwhms', []) + [fwhms]
            data['means'] = data.get('means', []) + [means]

    # Dump synthetic data into specified filename
    pickle.dump(data, open(FILENAME_TRAIN, 'w'))


Training AGD to Select :math:`\alpha` values
----------------------------

With a synthetic training dataset in hand, we train AGD to select two values of
:math:`\alpha` for the two-phase decomposition, :math:`\alpha_1` and
:math:`\alpha_2`. The necessary parameters to specify are:

1. ``FILENAME_TRAIN``: the pickle file containing the training dataset in GaussPy
   format

2. ``snr_thresh``: the signal to noise ratio below which GaussPy will not fit a
   component

3. ``alpha1_initial, alpha2_initial`` initial choices of the two :math:`\alpha`
   parameters

.. code-block:: python

    # Train AGD using synthetic dataset
    import numpy as np
    import pickle
    import gausspy.gp as gp
    reload(gp)

    # Set necessary parameters
    FILENAME_TRAIN = 'cube_training_data.pickle'
    snr_thresh = 5.
    alpha1_initial = 4
    alpha2_initial = 12

    g = gp.GaussianDecomposer()

    # Next, load the training dataset for analysis:
    g.load_training_data(FILENAME_TRAIN)

    # Set GaussPy parameters
    g.set('phase', 'two')
    g.set('SNR_thresh', [snr_thresh, snr_thresh])

    # Train AGD starting with initial guess for alpha
    g.train(alpha1_initial = alpha1_initial, alpha2_initial = alpha2_initial)

Training: starting with values of :math:`\alpha_{1,initial}=3` and
:math:`\alpha_{2,initial}=12`, the training process converges to
:math:`\alpha_1=2.87` and :math:`\alpha_2=10.61` with an accuracy of 71.2%
within 90 iterations.

Decomposing the Datacube
----------------------------

With the trained values in hand, we now decompose the target dataset:

.. code-block:: python

    # Decompose multiple Gaussian dataset using AGD with TRAINED alpha
    import pickle
    import gausspy.gp as gp

    # Specify necessary parameters
    alpha1 = 2.87
    alpha2 = 10.61
    snr_thresh = 5.0

    FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY = 'cube.pickle'
    FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP = 'cube_decomposed.pickle'

    # Load GaussPy
    g = gp.GaussianDecomposer()

    # Setting AGD parameters
    g.set('phase', 'two')
    g.set('SNR_thresh', [snr_thresh, snr_thresh])
    g.set('alpha1', alpha1)
    g.set('alpha2', alpha2)

    # Run GaussPy
    decomposed_data = g.batch_decomposition(FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY)

    # Save decomposition information
    pickle.dump(decomposed_data, open(FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP, 'w'))


And plot the results for an example set of 9 spectra, randomly selected, to see
how well the decomposition went.

.. code-block:: python

    # Plot GaussPy results for selections of cube LOS
    import numpy as np
    import pickle
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    # load the original data
    FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY = 'cube.pickle'
    data = pickle.load(open(FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY))

    # load decomposed data
    FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP = 'cube_decomposed.pickle'
    data_decomposed = pickle.load(open(FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP))

    index_values =  np.argsort(np.random.randn(5000))

    # plot random results
    fig = plt.figure(0,[9,9])

    for i in range(9):
        ax = fig.add_subplot(3, 3, i)

        index = index_values[i]
        x = data['x_values'][index]
        y = data['data_list'][index]

        fit_fwhms = data_decomposed['fwhms_fit'][index]
        fit_means = data_decomposed['means_fit'][index]
        fit_amps = data_decomposed['amplitudes_fit'][index]

        # Plot individual components
        if len(fit_amps) > 0.:
            for j in range(len(fit_amps)):
                amp, fwhm, mean =  fit_amps[j], fit_fwhms[j], fit_means[j]
                yy = amp * np.exp(-4. * np.log(2) * (x-mean)**2 / fwhm**2)
                ax.plot(x,yy,'-',lw=1.5,color='purple')

        ax.plot(x, y, color='black')
        ax.set_xlim(400,600)
        ax.set_xlabel('Channels')
        ax.set_ylabel('T_B (K)')

    plt.show()

Fig. :num:`#cube-decomposed` displays an example set of spectra from the data
cube and the GaussPy decomposition using trained values of :math:`\alpha_1=2.87`
and :math:`\alpha_2=10.61`.

.. _cube-decomposed:

.. figure:: cube_decomposed.png
    :width: 6in
    :align: center
    :figclass: align-center
    :alt: alternate text

Commit message:

edited example chapters for logalpha and updated the necessary figures

dataprep.rst, after:

.. _dataprep:

===================
Prepping a Datacube
===================

In this example we will download a datacube to decompose into individual
spectra. The example cube we will use is from the GALFA-HI emission survey at
the Arecibo Observatory, specifically the `M33 datacube
<https://sites.google.com/site/galfahi/data>`_ from `Putman et al. 2009
<http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009ApJ...703.1486P>`_. You can directly download
the cube from here:

http://www.astro.columbia.edu/~mputman/M33only.fits.gz


Storing Data cube in GaussPy-Friendly Format
----------------------------

Before decomposing the datacube, we must store the data in a format readable by
GaussPy. The following code provides an example of how to read a fits-formatted
datacube and store the spectral information. The necessary parameters to specify
here are:

1. ``FILENAME_DATA``: the fits filename of the target data cube

2. ``FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY``: the filename to store the GaussPy-friendly data in

3. ``RMS``: estimate of the RMS uncertainty per channel for constructing the
   error arrays

.. code-block:: python

    # Read fits datacube and save in GaussPy format
    import numpy as np
    import pickle
    from astropy.io import fits

    # Specify necessary parameters
    FILENAME_DATA = 'M33only.fits'
    FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY = 'cube.pickle'
    RMS = 0.06

    hdu_list = fits.open(FILENAME_DATA)
    hdu = hdu_list[0]
    cube = hdu.data

    # initialize
    data = {}
    errors = np.ones(cube.shape[0]) * RMS
    chan = np.arange(cube.shape[0])

    # cycle through each spectrum
    for i in xrange(cube.shape[1]):
        for j in xrange(cube.shape[2]):

            # get the spectrum
            spectrum = cube[:, i, j]

            # get the spectrum location
            location = np.array((i, j))

            # Enter results into GaussPy-friendly dataset
            data['data_list'] = data.get('data_list', []) + [spectrum]
            data['x_values'] = data.get('x_values', []) + [chan]
            data['errors'] = data.get('errors', []) + [errors]
            data['location'] = data.get('location', []) + [location]

    # Save decomposition information
    pickle.dump(data, open(FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY, 'w'))

The output pickle file from the above example code contains a python dictionary
with four keys, including the independent and dependent arrays (i.e. channels
and spectral values), an array per spectrum describing the uncertainty per
channel, and the (x,y) pixel location within the datacube for reference.

Creating a Synthetic Training Dataset
-------------------------------------

Before decomposing the target dataset, we need to train the AGD algorithm to
select the best values of :math:`\log\alpha` in two-phase decomposition. First, we
construct a synthetic training dataset composed of Gaussian components with
parameters sampled randomly from ranges that represent the data as closely as
possible.

1. ``RMS``: root mean square uncertainty per channel

2. ``NCHANNELS``: number of channels per spectrum

3. ``NSPECTRA``: number of spectra to include in the training dataset

4. ``NCOMPS_lims``: range in total number of components to include in each
   spectrum

5. ``AMP_lims, FWHM_lims, MEAN_lims``: range of possible Gaussian component
   values, amplitudes, FWHM and means, from which to build the spectra

6. ``TRAINING_SET`` : True or False, determines whether the decomposition
   "answers" are stored along with the data for accuracy verification in
   training

7. ``FILENAME_TRAIN`` : filename for storing the training data

.. code-block:: python

    # Create training dataset with Gaussian profile
    import numpy as np
    import pickle

    def gaussian(amp, fwhm, mean):
        return lambda x: amp * np.exp(-4. * np.log(2) * (x-mean)**2 / fwhm**2)

    # Estimate of the root-mean-square uncertainty per channel (RMS)
    RMS = 0.06

    # Specify the number of spectral channels (NCHANNELS)
    NCHANNELS = 680

    # Specify the number of spectra (NSPECTRA)
    NSPECTRA = 200

    # Estimate the number of components
    NCOMPS_lims = [3,6]

    # Specify the min-max range of possible properties of the Gaussian function paramters:
    AMP_lims = [0.5,30]
    FWHM_lims = [20,150] # channels
    MEAN_lims = [400,600] # channels

    # Indicate whether the data created here will be used as a training set
    # (a.k.a. decide to store the "true" answers or not at the end)
    TRAINING_SET = True

    # Specify the pickle file to store the results in
    FILENAME_TRAIN = 'cube_training_data.pickle'

    # Initialize
    data = {}
    chan = np.arange(NCHANNELS)
    errors = np.ones(NCHANNELS) * RMS

    # Begin populating data
    for i in range(NSPECTRA):
        spectrum_i = np.random.randn(NCHANNELS) * RMS

        amps = []
        fwhms = []
        means = []

        ncomps = np.random.choice((np.arange(NCOMPS_lims[0],NCOMPS_lims[1]+1)))

        for comp in xrange(ncomps):
            # Select random values for components within specified ranges
            a = np.random.uniform(AMP_lims[0], AMP_lims[1])
            w = np.random.uniform(FWHM_lims[0], FWHM_lims[1])
            m = np.random.uniform(MEAN_lims[0], MEAN_lims[1])

            # Add Gaussian profile with the above random parameters to the spectrum
            spectrum_i += gaussian(a, w, m)(chan)

            # Append the parameters to initialized lists for storing
            amps.append(a)
            fwhms.append(w)
            means.append(m)

        # Enter results into AGD dataset
        data['data_list'] = data.get('data_list', []) + [spectrum_i]
        data['x_values'] = data.get('x_values', []) + [chan]
        data['errors'] = data.get('errors', []) + [errors]

        # If training data, keep answers
        if TRAINING_SET:
            data['amplitudes'] = data.get('amplitudes', []) + [amps]
            data['fwhms'] = data.get('fwhms', []) + [fwhms]
            data['means'] = data.get('means', []) + [means]

    # Dump synthetic data into specified filename
    pickle.dump(data, open(FILENAME_TRAIN, 'w'))


Training AGD to Select :math:`\alpha` values
----------------------------

With a synthetic training dataset in hand, we train AGD to select two values of
:math:`\log\alpha` for the two-phase decomposition, :math:`\log\alpha_1` and
:math:`\log\alpha_2`. The necessary parameters to specify are:

1. ``FILENAME_TRAIN``: the pickle file containing the training dataset in GaussPy
   format

2. ``snr_thresh``: the signal to noise ratio below which GaussPy will not fit a
   component

3. ``alpha1_initial, alpha2_initial`` initial choices of the two :math:`\log\alpha`
   parameters

.. code-block:: python

    # Train AGD using synthetic dataset
    import numpy as np
    import pickle
    import gausspy.gp as gp
    reload(gp)

    # Set necessary parameters
    FILENAME_TRAIN = 'cube_training_data.pickle'
    snr_thresh = 5.
    alpha1_initial = 4
    alpha2_initial = 12

    g = gp.GaussianDecomposer()

    # Next, load the training dataset for analysis:
    g.load_training_data(FILENAME_TRAIN)

    # Set GaussPy parameters
    g.set('phase', 'two')
    g.set('SNR_thresh', [snr_thresh, snr_thresh])

    # Train AGD starting with initial guess for alpha
    g.train(alpha1_initial = alpha1_initial, alpha2_initial = alpha2_initial)

Training: starting with values of :math:`\log\alpha_{1,initial}=3` and
:math:`\log\alpha_{2,initial}=12`, the training process converges to
:math:`\log\alpha_1=2.87` and :math:`\log\alpha_2=10.61` with an accuracy of 71.2%
within 90 iterations.

Decomposing the Datacube
----------------------------

With the trained values in hand, we now decompose the target dataset:

.. code-block:: python

    # Decompose multiple Gaussian dataset using AGD with TRAINED alpha
    import pickle
    import gausspy.gp as gp

    # Specify necessary parameters
    alpha1 = 2.87
    alpha2 = 10.61
    snr_thresh = 5.0

    FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY = 'cube.pickle'
    FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP = 'cube_decomposed.pickle'

    # Load GaussPy
    g = gp.GaussianDecomposer()

    # Setting AGD parameters
    g.set('phase', 'two')
    g.set('SNR_thresh', [snr_thresh, snr_thresh])
    g.set('alpha1', alpha1)
    g.set('alpha2', alpha2)

    # Run GaussPy
    decomposed_data = g.batch_decomposition(FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY)

    # Save decomposition information
    pickle.dump(decomposed_data, open(FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP, 'w'))


And plot the results for an example set of 9 spectra, randomly selected, to see
how well the decomposition went.

.. code-block:: python

    # Plot GaussPy results for selections of cube LOS
    import numpy as np
    import pickle
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    # load the original data
    FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY = 'cube.pickle'
    data = pickle.load(open(FILENAME_DATA_GAUSSPY))

    # load decomposed data
    FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP = 'cube_decomposed.pickle'
    data_decomposed = pickle.load(open(FILENAME_DATA_DECOMP))

    index_values =  np.argsort(np.random.randn(5000))

    # plot random results
    fig = plt.figure(0,[9,9])

    for i in range(9):
        ax = fig.add_subplot(3, 3, i)

        index = index_values[i]
        x = data['x_values'][index]
        y = data['data_list'][index]

        fit_fwhms = data_decomposed['fwhms_fit'][index]
        fit_means = data_decomposed['means_fit'][index]
        fit_amps = data_decomposed['amplitudes_fit'][index]

        # Plot individual components
        if len(fit_amps) > 0.:
            for j in range(len(fit_amps)):
                amp, fwhm, mean =  fit_amps[j], fit_fwhms[j], fit_means[j]
                yy = amp * np.exp(-4. * np.log(2) * (x-mean)**2 / fwhm**2)
                ax.plot(x,yy,'-',lw=1.5,color='purple')

        ax.plot(x, y, color='black')
        ax.set_xlim(400,600)
        ax.set_xlabel('Channels')
        ax.set_ylabel('T_B (K)')

    plt.show()

Fig. :num:`#cube-decomposed` displays an example set of spectra from the data
cube and the GaussPy decomposition using trained values of :math:`\log\alpha_1=2.87`
and :math:`\log\alpha_2=10.61`.

.. _cube-decomposed:

.. figure:: cube_decomposed.png
    :width: 6in
    :align: center
    :figclass: align-center
    :alt: alternate text

    Example spectra from the GALFA-HI M33 datacube, decomposed by GaussPy following two-phase training.
