install.rst, before:

.. _install:

===============
Installation
===============

------------
Dependencies
------------

You will need the following packages to run GaussPy. We list the version of each
package which we know to be compatible with GaussPy.

*  `python 2.7 <http://www.numpy.org/>`_

* `numpy (v1.6.1) <http://www.numpy.org/>`_

* `scipy (v0.17.0) <http://www.scipy.org/>`_

* `lmfit (v0.9.2) <https://lmfit.github.io/lmfit-py/intro.html>`_

* `h5py (v2.0.1) <http://www.h5py.org/>`_


If you do not already have Python 2.7, you can install the `Anaconda Scientific
Python distribution <https://store.continuum.io/cshop/anaconda/>`_, which comes
pre-loaded with `numpy`, `scipy`, and `h5py`.

---------------------
Optional Dependencies
---------------------

If you wish to use GaussPy's plotting capabilities you will need to install
`matplotlib`:

* `matplotlib (v1.1.1) <http://matplotlib.org/>`_

If you wish to use optimization with Fortran code you will need

* `GNU Scientific Library (GSL) <http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/>`_

----------------
Download GaussPy
----------------

Download GaussPy from...

--------------------------------
Installing Dependencies on Linux
--------------------------------

You will need several libraries which the `GSL`, `h5py`, and `scipy` libraries
depend on. Install these required packages with:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt-get install libblas-dev liblapack-dev gfortran libgsl0-dev libhdf5-serial-dev 
    sudo apt-get install hdf5-tools

Install pip for easy installation of python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt-get install python-pip

Then install the required python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install scipy numpy h5py lmfit

Install the optional dependencies for plotting:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install matplotlib

---------------------------------------------
Installing Dependencies on Linux without Root
---------------------------------------------

Installing dependencies on Linux without root can be involved. You will need to
download each dependency and install from source in the following way:

.. code-block:: bash

    apt-get source <library>
    cd <library>
    ./configure --prefix=$HOME
    make
    make install

where `<library>` is each package in `libblas-dev liblapack-dev gfortran
libgsl0-dev libhdf5-serial-dev install hdf5-tools` as well as `python-pip`.
After dependencies are installed, you can install the Python packages with the
--user option in pip

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install --user scipy numpy h5py lmfit

and the optional plotting package
    
.. code-block:: bash

    pip install --user matplotlib

------------------------------
Installing Dependencies on OSX
------------------------------

Installation on OSX can be done easily with homebrew. First install the external
dependencies

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo brew install gsl

Install pip for easy installation of python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo easy_install pip

Then install the required python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install numpy scipy h5py lmfit

Install the optional dependencies for plotting:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install matplotlib

------------------
Installing GaussPy
------------------

To install make sure that all dependences are already installed and properly
linked to python --python has to be able to load them--. Then cd to the local
directory containing GaussPy and install via

.. code-block:: bash
    
    python setup.py install

If you don't have root access and/or wish a local installation of
GaussPy then use

.. code-block:: bash
    
    python setup.py install --user

change the 'requires' statement in setup.py to include `scipy` and `lmfit`.

Commit message:

added disclaimer about no-root installation for OSX, its hard to do

install.rst, after:

.. _install:

===============
Installation
===============

------------
Dependencies
------------

You will need the following packages to run GaussPy. We list the version of each
package which we know to be compatible with GaussPy.

*  `python 2.7 <http://www.numpy.org/>`_

* `numpy (v1.6.1) <http://www.numpy.org/>`_

* `scipy (v0.17.0) <http://www.scipy.org/>`_

* `lmfit (v0.9.2) <https://lmfit.github.io/lmfit-py/intro.html>`_

* `h5py (v2.0.1) <http://www.h5py.org/>`_


If you do not already have Python 2.7, you can install the `Anaconda Scientific
Python distribution <https://store.continuum.io/cshop/anaconda/>`_, which comes
pre-loaded with `numpy`, `scipy`, and `h5py`.

---------------------
Optional Dependencies
---------------------

If you wish to use GaussPy's plotting capabilities you will need to install
`matplotlib`:

* `matplotlib (v1.1.1) <http://matplotlib.org/>`_

If you wish to use optimization with Fortran code you will need

* `GNU Scientific Library (GSL) <http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/>`_

----------------
Download GaussPy
----------------

Download GaussPy from...

--------------------------------
Installing Dependencies on Linux
--------------------------------

You will need several libraries which the `GSL`, `h5py`, and `scipy` libraries
depend on. Install these required packages with:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt-get install libblas-dev liblapack-dev gfortran libgsl0-dev libhdf5-serial-dev 
    sudo apt-get install hdf5-tools

Install pip for easy installation of python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt-get install python-pip

Then install the required python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install scipy numpy h5py lmfit

Install the optional dependencies for plotting:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install matplotlib

---------------------------------------------
Installing Dependencies on Linux without Root
---------------------------------------------

Installing dependencies on Linux without root can be involved. You will need to
download each dependency and install from source in the following way:

.. code-block:: bash

    apt-get source <library>
    cd <library>
    ./configure --prefix=$HOME
    make
    make install

where `<library>` is each package in `libblas-dev liblapack-dev gfortran
libgsl0-dev libhdf5-serial-dev install hdf5-tools` as well as `python-pip`.
After dependencies are installed, you can install the Python packages with the
--user option in pip:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install --user scipy numpy h5py lmfit

and the optional plotting package:
    
.. code-block:: bash

    pip install --user matplotlib

------------------------------
Installing Dependencies on OSX
------------------------------

Installation on OSX can be done easily with homebrew. First install the external
dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo brew install gsl

Install pip for easy installation of python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo easy_install pip

Then install the required python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install numpy scipy h5py lmfit

Install the optional dependencies for plotting:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo pip install matplotlib

This documentation currently does not support instructions for installing
Gausspy on OSX without root access.

------------------
Installing GaussPy
------------------

To install make sure that all dependences are already installed and properly
linked to python --python has to be able to load them--. Then cd to the local
directory containing GaussPy and install via

.. code-block:: bash
    
    python setup.py install

If you don't have root access and/or wish a local installation of
GaussPy then use

.. code-block:: bash
    
    python setup.py install --user

change the 'requires' statement in setup.py to include `scipy` and `lmfit`.
